---
path: "/ladybird"
date: 2018-01-04
title: Lady Bird 
---

Post #3 in my movie series. Lady Bird moved from ‘Still need to see’ to ‘Favorites of 2017’ and I definitely need to talk about it. Between this, Colossal, and Three Billboards the women-led movies crushed it in 2017. Also, while this is an open place to discuss I’m especially curious to hear how women feel about this movie given that its way more about their experiences than mine.

Lady Bird is a slice of life move that follows a girl through her last year of high school, and nothing about that synopsis interests me. Yet somehow this movie is earnest, warm, genuine and quite honestly the most human movie I’ve seen in a very long time. I’ve never had a movie bring my guard down so effortlessly. It didn’t break my guard down, I just noticed it was down and my usual cynicism was no where to be seen. I am writing this several hours after having seen the movie and I still feel some of that glow. Lady Bird was exceptionally acted across the board, but special note has to be made of Lady Bird herself (Saoirse Ronan) and her mother (Lauri Metcalf). Their relationship was the heart of this movie, was performed with such honesty and sincerity that it hardly seemed like acting at all. Having grown up with a strong willed teenage sister and an equally strong willed mother I definitely recognized some of those moments. The editing was also fantastically expressive. Sometimes it was the quick cut that gave you just enough information to make a scene hilarious. Sometimes it was the montage that skipped over inciting incidents to focus on the actual emotional results. Ultimately this unique editing combined with the looseness of the narrative to make the entire experience feel like a memory.

Usually, I find slice of life movies boring, and while movies about teenagers in high school can be fun they’re always a far cry away from my top of the year lists. I almost made a joke here about two negatives making a positive but I think thats actually what happened. The movie had plenty of inventive sequences that I adored (the communion wafers scene was just delightful), but even the standard sequences that I’ve seen dozens of times worked way better than I expected them to, and I think thats because its a slice of life movie. As much as I love narrative-driven films they, by design, add artificiality to what you’re seeing because they manipulate events into being a part of a story with a specific direction in mind. Real life isn’t structured though, and I suspect that divorcing universal young-adult moments (like losing your virginity or getting drunk for the first time) from that structure made them feel more relatable.

As much as I love strict narratives they are somewhat flawed in that they suggest that after the hero has done the thing and fulfilled their arc that everything worked out for them from then on, but real life isn’t like that. Lets say, hypothetically, that you have a main character defeat an overwhelming evil and redeem his father, only to become a disgraced hermit two movies and 30 years later. The implications of a narrative are so deeply embedded in our culture that audiences might see this as a betrayal of the character even though they should know from their own experience that life is messy and even after a win you can still lose.
